Tech review: Add Chrome 121 new speculation rules features (#32360)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/html/element/script/type/speculationrules/index.md

The **`speculationrules`** value of the [`type`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type) attribute of the [`<script>` element](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script) indicates that the body of the element contains speculation rules.

> Speculation rules take the form of a JSON structure that determine what links (documents pointed to by {{htmlelement("a")}} elements) should be prefetched or prerendered by the browser. This is part of the {{domxref("Speculation Rules API", "", "", "nocode")}}.

Author: Yeah, good point. I've changed back to the old wording, as it covers both cases better. The new wording really describes only the document rules case. We can elaborate on the specifics in the `"source"` value descriptions.

    - `"and"`: An array containing one or more objects containing conditions (`"href_matches"`, `"selector_matches"`, `"and"`, `"not"`, or `"or"`), all of which must match for the rule to be applied to them.
    - `"not"`: An object containing one condition (`"href_matches"`, `"selector_matches"`, `"and"`, `"not"`, or `"or"`) which, if it matches, will _not_ have the rule applied to it.
    - `"or"`: An array containing one or more objects containing conditions (`"href_matches"`, `"selector_matches"`, `"and"`, `"not"`, or `"or"`), any of which can match for the rule to be applied to them.

    `"where"` conditions can be nested multiple levels deep to create complex conditions, or you can choose to split them into separate rules to keep them simple. See [where examples](#where_examples) for multiple examples of use.

- `"eagerness"`

  - : A string providing a hint to the browser as to how eagerly it should prefetch/preload link targets in order to balance performance advantages against resource overheads. Possible values are:

>     - `"immediate"`: The author thinks the link is very likely to be followed, and/or the document may take significant time to fetch. Prefetch/preload should start as soon as possible, subject only to considerations such as user preferences and resource limits.

Author: Ah yes, I've updated all such instances to "prefetch/prerender", as explained in my earlier comment.

    - `"eager"`: The author wants to prefetch/prerender a large number of navigations, as early as possible. Prefetch/prerender should start on any slight suggestion that a link may be followed. For example, the user could move their mouse cursor towards the link, hover/focus it for a moment, or pause scrolling with the link in a prominent place.
    - `"moderate"`: The author is looking for a balance between `eager` and `conservative`. Prefetch/prerender should start when there is a reasonable suggestion that the user will follow a link in the near future. For example, the user could scroll a link into the viewport and hover/focus it for some time.

>     - `"conservative"`: The author wishes to get some benefit from speculative loading with a fairly small tradeoff of resources. Prefetch/prerender should start only when the user is about to start activating a link.

Reviewer: I think I'd avoid "activation" as that has a particular meaning in speculation rules (i.e. activationStart is when the document is navigated to - which happens after the actual link is started to clink).

```suggestion
    - `"conservative"`: The author wishes to get some benefit from speculative loading with a fairly small tradeoff of resources. Prefetch/prerender should start only when the user is about starting to click on the link. For example, on mousedown or pointerdown.
```

    If not specified, `"source": "list"` rules default to `immediate` and `"source": "document"` rules default to `conservative`. The browser takes this hint into consideration along with its own heuristics, so it may select a link that the author has hinted as less eager than another, if the less eager candidate is considered a better choice.

- `"expects_no_vary_search"`
  - : A string providing a hint to the browser as to what the expected {{httpheader("No-Vary-Search")}} header value will be (if any) for documents that it is receiving prefetch/prerender requests for via the speculation rules. The browser can use this to determine ahead of time whether it is more useful to wait for an existing prefetch/prerender to finish, or start a new fetch request when the speculation rule is matched. See the [`"expects_no_vary_search"` example](#expects_no_vary_search_example) for more explanation of how this can be used.
- `"referrer_policy"`

>   - : A string representing a specific referrer policy string to use when requesting the URLs specified in the rule — see [`Referrer-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy) for possible values. The purpose of this is to allow the referring page to set a stricter policy specifically for the speculative request than the policy the page already has set (either by default, or by using `Referrer-Policy`). A laxer policy set in the speculation rules will not override a stricter policy set on the referring page.

Author: OK, in the next commit, I've tried rewriting this bit based on your feedback, but I am not 100% sure I've got it right. Can you check it again?

>   - : A string representing a specific referrer policy string to use when requesting the URLs specified in the rule — see [`Referrer-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy) for possible values. The purpose of this is to allow the referring page to set a stricter policy specifically for the speculative request than the policy the page already has set (either by default, or by using `Referrer-Policy`). A laxer policy set in the speculation rules will not override a stricter policy set on the referring page.

Author: OK, gotcha. In the next commit I have moved that stipulation to a separate note, so that it is available, but the actual `"referrer_policy"` key description is kept clean and simple.

>   - : A string representing a specific referrer policy string to use when requesting the URLs specified in the rule — see [`Referrer-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy) for possible values. The purpose of this is to allow the referring page to set a stricter policy specifically for the speculative request than the policy the page already has set (either by default, or by using `Referrer-Policy`). A laxer policy set in the speculation rules will not override a stricter policy set on the referring page.

Reviewer 2: Looks good. Thanks.

- `"eagerness"`

  - : A string providing a hint to the browser as to how eagerly it should prefetch/prerender link targets in order to balance performance advantages against resource overheads. Possible values are:

    - `"immediate"`: The author thinks the link is very likely to be followed, and/or the document may take significant time to fetch. Prefetch/prerender should start as soon as possible, subject only to considerations such as user preferences and resource limits.
    - `"eager"`: The author wants to prefetch/prerender a large number of navigations, as early as possible. Prefetch/prerender should start on any slight suggestion that a link may be followed. For example, the user could move their mouse cursor towards the link, hover/focus it for a moment, or pause scrolling with the link in a prominent place.
    - `"moderate"`: The author is looking for a balance between `eager` and `conservative`. Prefetch/prerender should start when there is a reasonable suggestion that the user will follow a link in the near future. For example, the user could scroll a link into the viewport and hover/focus it for some time.

>     - `"conservative"`: The author wishes to get some benefit from speculative loading with a fairly small tradeoff of resources. Prefetch/prerender should start only when the user is about to start clicking on the link, for example on {{domxref("Element.mousedown_event", "mousedown")}} or {{domxref("Element.pointerdown_event", "pointerdown")}}.

Reviewer: "about to start clicking" seems weird to me.

WDYT about this:

```suggestion
    - `"conservative"`: The author wishes to get some benefit from speculative loading with a fairly small tradeoff of resources. Prefetch/prerender should start only when the user is starting to click on the link, for example on {{domxref("Element.mousedown_event", "mousedown")}} or {{domxref("Element.pointerdown_event", "pointerdown")}}.
```

    If not specified, `"source": "list"` rules default to `immediate` and `"source": "document"` rules default to `conservative`. The browser takes this hint into consideration along with its own heuristics, so it may select a link that the author has hinted as less eager than another, if the less eager candidate is considered a better choice.

- `"expects_no_vary_search"`
  - : A string providing a hint to the browser as to what the expected {{httpheader("No-Vary-Search")}} header value will be (if any) for documents that it is receiving prefetch/prerender requests for via the speculation rules. The browser can use this to determine ahead of time whether it is more useful to wait for an existing prefetch/prerender to finish, or start a new fetch request when the speculation rule is matched. See the [`"expects_no_vary_search"` example](#expects_no_vary_search_example) for more explanation of how this can be used.
- `"referrer_policy"`

>   - : A string representing a specific referrer policy string to use when requesting the URLs specified in the rule — see [`Referrer-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy) for possible values. The purpose of this is to allow the referring page to set a stricter policy specifically for the speculative request than the policy the page already has set (either by default, or by using `Referrer-Policy`). A laxer policy set in the speculation rules will not override a stricter policy set on the referring page.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps also mention that in the case of document rules, the matched link's specified referrer policy (e.g. using the referrerpolicy attribute) would be used (unless the rule specifies the policy).

Author: OK, note added! Again, please let me know if you think what I've written makes sense.

- `"relative_to"`

  - : A string specifying where you want links matched by URL to be matched relative to. The value can be one of:

    - `document`: URLs should be matched relative to the document the speculation rules are being set on.
    - `ruleset`: URLs should be matched relative to the file the rules are specified in. This is the default value.

>     When rules are specified inside the same document they are being set for (i.e. in an inline `<script>` element), this key setting makes no different. It is significant when the rules are contained in an external file (i.e. as is the case when using the {{httpheader("Speculation-Rules")}} header to specify rules).

Reviewer 2: nit: "makes no difference"

    - `"moderate"`: The author is looking for a balance between `eager` and `conservative`. Prefetch/prerender should start when there is a reasonable suggestion that the user will follow a link in the near future. For example, the user could scroll a link into the viewport and hover/focus it for some time.
    - `"conservative"`: The author wishes to get some benefit from speculative loading with a fairly small tradeoff of resources. Prefetch/prerender should start only when the user is starting to click on the link, for example on {{domxref("Element.mousedown_event", "mousedown")}} or {{domxref("Element.pointerdown_event", "pointerdown")}}.

    If not specified, `"source": "list"` rules default to `immediate` and `"source": "document"` rules default to `conservative`. The browser takes this hint into consideration along with its own heuristics, so it may select a link that the author has hinted as less eager than another, if the less eager candidate is considered a better choice.

- `"expects_no_vary_search"`

>   - : A string providing a hint to the browser as to what the expected {{httpheader("No-Vary-Search")}} header value will be (if any) for documents that it is receiving prefetch/prerender requests for via the speculation rules. The browser can use this to determine ahead of time whether it is more useful to wait for an existing prefetch/prerender to finish, or start a new fetch request when the speculation rule is matched. See the [`"expects_no_vary_search"` example](#expects_no_vary_search_example) for more explanation of how this can be used.

Reviewer 3: nit: the others seem to have a blank line between the key and the info, is one not desired here?

Author: It makes no difference to the rendering, but I do tend to prefer to put in these line breaks for more complex `<dl>`s so the source is easier to parse. I'll make them consistent. 

Of course, the auto-linter might still decide to do something weird with them. We'll see ;-)

```json
{ "where": { "href_matches": "/next" } }
```

```json
{ "where": { "selector_matches": ".important-link" } }
```

`"href_matches"` and `"selector_matches"` can also be set equal to arrays of values, so multiple URL patterns or CSS selectors can be matched simultaneously:

```json
{ "where": { "href_matches": ["/next", "/profile"] } }
```

```json
{ "where": { "selector_matches": [".important-link", "#unique-link"] } }
```

URL patterns can also contain wildcard (`*`) characters, allowing a single value to match multiple URLs. The following for example could match `user/`, `user/settings`, `user/stats`, etc.

```json
{ "where": { "href_matches": "/user/*" } }
```

Any condition can be negated by placing it inside a `"not"` condition — this means that, when matched, it _won't_ have the speculation rule applied to it. For example:

```json
{ "where": { "not": { "href_matches": "/logout" } } }
```

> However, this isn't much use on its own, as by default links aren't prerendered or prefetched. `"not"` is useful when combined with other conditions inside `"and"` or `"or"` conditions — these take the value of arrays containing multiple conditions, all of any of which have to match for the speculation rules to apply to them.

Author: OK, I think I get it now. I've updated the description to:

> This will cause all links that _don't_ match the URL pattern `/logout` to have the rule applied to them.
>
> `"not"` is also useful when combined with other conditions inside `"and"` or `"or"` conditions — these take the value of arrays containing multiple conditions, all or any of which have to match for the speculation rules to apply to them.

I also decided to change the complete example to a prefetch example, and add a note explaining the cross-site thing:

> **Note:** The `where` pattern above excludes cross-site links, which are supported for prefetching (provided the user has no cookies set for the destination site, to protect against tracking) but not for prerendering.

To solve this, we can provide a hint as to what the page author expects the `No-Vary-Search` value to be. A speculation rule can have an `"expects_no_vary_search"` field, which contains a string representation of the the expected header value:

```html
<script type="speculationrules">
  {
    "prefetch": [
      {
        "urls": ["/users"],
        "expects_no_vary_search": "params=(\"id\")"
      }
    ]
  }
</script>
<a href="/users?id=345">User Bob</a>
```

This indicates that Option 2 described above is what the server is expected to produce. If a navigation starts while there is an ongoing prefetch of `/users`, this informs the browser that it is appropriate to wait for the prefetch, instead of immediately starting another fetch for `/users?id=345`.

### `eagerness` examples

The following set of speculation rules shows how `eagerness` can be used to hint at the eagerness with which the browser should prefetch/prerender each matching set of links.

```html
<script type="speculationrules">
  {
    "prefetch": [{ "urls": ["/next"], "eagerness": "immediate" }],
    "prerender": [

>       { "urls": ["/next"], "eagerness": "eager" },

Reviewer 4: eagerness with list rules currently doesn't do much, although we've discussed how it maybe should. /cc @jeremyroman

But in the meantime, using a document rules example might be better. E.g. conservative fallback for everything, eager for `"selector_matches": ".product-link"` or something like that?

Author: I've updated the example to only use document rules, along the lines of what you suggested.

Since eagerness settings on list rules don't currently do very much, I'm thinking that this should be noted in the browser compat data for eagerness. Can you elaborate on what "doesn't do much" means? What would be a good single sentence description for what the current state of play is?

Reviewer: So for list rules you could use the following eagerness settings:
- `immediate` - prerender every URL in the list as soon as the page loads. That's kinda what you'd expect (and what happens now) and hence why it's the default - so no need to specify it.
- `eager` - is the same as `immediate` now, so no need to specify it. It could be cleverer in future to only use as it scrolls into viewport.
- `moderate`/`conservative` are as you interact with the link. Yeah you _could_ use them for list rules, but much more likely to do this for document rules. So unlikely to use this to be honest.

List rules are either static (so action as soon as seen) or inserted by JS rather than managed by the browser (so action as soon as JS inserts since the JS should decide when to add them). Either way it's unlikely you want to change the default.

Maybe if we add more eagerness heuristics that might be relevant to list rules (e.g. scroll in to viewport), that might change, but for now it doesn't really "do much" for list rules.

Does that help? Now find a way to condense that down into a good, single sentence 😁

Author: Thanks @tunetheweb, this is really helpful! In my next commit, I've added a note to try to tell this story in succinct form:

> **Note:** The effects of eagerness settings are less useful for list rules. By default, list rule URLs are prefetched/prerendered immediately as soon as the rules are parsed, which is what you'd expect — they are intended for explicit listing of high-priority URLs that you want to make available as soon as possible. For this reason, `eager` has the same effect as `immediate` in current implementations. Lower eagerness settings are for prefetching/prerendering when links are interacted with, and for these you are more likely to use document rules to find them on the page.

Reviewer 3: Kinda commented on that, but it [does work](https://sr-prefetch-demo.glitch.me/?rules=list-moderate), and I could imagine use cases where you only want to prefetch the home page for instance. You _could_ do that with `href_matches` but if you know the exact URLs then escaping them properly for a URL pattern isn't really necessary.

It's mainly that we won't get any engagement signal that would cause a non-immediate eagerness candidate to fire unless we see interaction with the link, and if there's a link you could have chosen to select it with a document rule.

Author: Just to check, @jeremyroman do you feel that the added note needs updating in any way?

      }
    ]
  }
</script>
<a href="/users?id=345">User Bob</a>
```

This indicates that Option 2 described above is what the server is expected to produce. If a navigation starts while there is an ongoing prefetch of `/users`, this informs the browser that it is appropriate to wait for the prefetch, instead of immediately starting another fetch for `/users?id=345`.

### `eagerness` example

The following set of document rules shows how `eagerness` can be used to hint at the eagerness with which the browser should prerender each matching set of links.

```html
<script type="speculationrules">
  {
    "prerender": [
      {
        "where": { "href_matches": "/*" },
        "eagerness": "conservative"
      },
      {
        "where": { "selector_matches": ".product-link" },
        "eagerness": "eager"
      }
    ]
  }
</script>
```

Here we are hinting that:

- All same-site links contained in the document should be conservatively prerendered (i.e. when the user starts to activate them).
- Any product links (in this case, those with a `class` of `.product-link`) in the document should be eagerly prerendered (i.e. if the user makes any kind of move towards navigating to them).

> > **Note:** The effects of eagerness settings are less useful for list rules. By default, list rule URLs are prefetched/prerendered immediately as soon as the rules are parsed, which is what you'd expect — they are intended for explicit listing of high-priority URLs that you want to make available as soon as possible. For this reason, `eager` has the same effect as `immediate` in current implementations. Lower eagerness settings are for prefetching/prerendering when links are interacted with, and for these you are more likely to use document rules to find them on the page.

Reviewer 3: It [does work](https://sr-prefetch-demo.glitch.me/?rules=list-moderate), though, and might be something you want on occasion. Agreed that it's more likely to use eagerness with document rules, though.

In the above example, only the first `"href_matches"` will be matched relative to the document's base URL.

> Note that `relative_to` is mainly relevant if the speculation rules JSON file is on a different origin to the document you wish to apply them to:

Author: Updated. Ta.

1. If the document is located at `https://example.com/some/subpage.html` and the rules are at `https://example.com/resources/rules.json`, then `/home` always equates to `https://example.com/home` regardless of whether `relative_to` is set to `document` or `ruleset`.

> 2. However, if the document is located at `https://example.com/some/subpage.html` and the rules are at `https://other.example/resources/rules.json` (for example, on a third party, or a cookieless resource origin), then:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. However, if the document is located at `https://example.com/some/subpage.html` and the rules are at `https://other.example/resources/rules.json` (for example, on a third-party or cookieless resource origin), then:
```

it's slightly odd to say that a resource is "on a third party" (it's on the origin, not the organization itself), so merging this to refer to origins of two kinds seems mildly cleaner

Author: ok, updated.
